We’re very happy
to have hundreds of thousands of children
associated
with our congregations worldwide.
You can be assured Jehovah loves
every one of those children.
Well, how can we say that?
Well, one reason is that every child
owes their name to Jehovah God
because he’s the Originator
of life and, in fact,
the Originator
of the family unit as well.
When Jesus was in heaven,
he recognized
and observed
Jehovah’s intense love for children.
And when Jesus
walked the earth,
he reflected
those same qualities toward children.
The psalmist
beautifully expresses
Jehovah’s feelings
about children
in the 127th Psalm
and verse 3.
Well, let’s read that
—Psalm 127:3.
It says: “Look!
“Sons are an inheritance
from Jehovah;
the fruit of the womb
is a reward.”
So not only are our children
a blessing, or “a reward,”
the scripture indicates
that they “are an inheritance” as well.
Yes, they are a gift
to you from Jehovah.
A person who hopes
to inherit something
usually prepare
to receive it
and then takes good care
of it afterward.
I’m sure that’s exactly what you parents
want to do with your children.
Well, children
can bring much joy;
they can
also cause frustration.
So the question is:
How can you find joy in your children
despite living in a stressful world?
One suggestion
is to view your children
the way Jehovah does.
These are special gifts
to you from him.
Love them;
make them feel loved.
It’s not enough for you
to know you love your own children.
They need to know it.
They will not know it
unless you find ways
to show your love to them.
And as with any gift,
there’s a responsibility to take care of it.
If we go back
to the 127th Psalm,
notice the illustration
that King Solomon uses
to explain this responsibility.
It’s in verses 4 and 5.
Psalm 127:4, 5,
it says: “Like arrows
in the hand of a mighty man,
“so are the sons of one’s youth.
“Happy is the man who fills
his quiver with them.
They will not be put to shame.”
So children
are likened to arrows
and parents
to mighty warriors.
So a warrior
will take the arrow
and he will carefully aim it
so he hits the target.
Well, it’s the same
with you parents.
We encourage you,
carefully direct your children
in a way that,
so to speak, you “hit the target”
so your children
can have a happy, fulfilling life
of serving Jehovah God.
So, what can help
you to do that?
Pray to Jehovah
to help you build
and maintain a strong relationship
with your children.
This closeness
will help them
to respond favorably
to your good direction.
Yes, the way you treat
your children is going to affect
not only their future
but your happiness as well.
Now, there are five suggestions
that might be of assistance
in building and maintaining
this strong relationship
with your children.
The first one:
Tell your children
you love them.
You might say,
“Well, that’s not the way I was raised.”
Well, maybe not.
But learn from the example
of Jehovah God
because Jehovah
openly expressed his affection
for his Son, Jesus.
And no matter how
you were brought up,
learn to express openly
your feelings
toward your children.
One father said this:
“I have found that children
are a bit like some flowers.
“Just as these little plants
turn toward the sun
“to receive light and warmth,
children look to their parents
“for love
and for reassurance
that they are
welcome members of the family.”
Don’t make your children
have to ask you,
“Mom, Dad,
do you love me?”
No, on a regular basis,
let your words support the fact
that you love them.
Now, another way to build
a strong relationship with your children is:
Give them your time.
That’s going to be a challenge
in the world we’re living in now.
But don’t you think your children
are worth meeting that challenge?
It’s going to require
good organization on your part
and maybe even
making some sacrifices
—giving up some things
that you enjoy doing.
But spend a lot of time
talking to your children,
eating with your children,
playing with your children.
It’s up to you parents
to figure out
how you can give
your time to your children.
A mother once asked
her children,
“If you could have
anything you wanted,
what would you like most?”
All four responded,
“More time
with Mom and Dad.”
Yes, show your children
how important
they are to you
by spending time with them.
But, you know,
there’s more that’s necessary
than just to be
physically around them.
That leads us
to our third suggestion:
Listen to your children
and acknowledge their feelings.
So when communicating
with your children,
don’t dominate
the conversations.
Let them talk.
Listen carefully
and respectfully.
Try to understand
how they feel.
And when they express themselves
and their emotions and their thoughts
(and sometimes,
maybe in extreme terms),
don’t respond in a similar way.
Proverbs 16:23 says:
“The heart of the wise one
gives his mouth insight.”
So parents, work hard
at patiently trying
to understand why your child
feels the way they do
and how you can be of help.
One father expressed
the matter this way,
“Since Jehovah allows me
to pour out my heart to him in prayer,
“I think it is only fair
that I allow my children
“to pour out their positive
and negative feelings to me.”
Also listen to your children
and acknowledge their feelings.
Now, the fourth suggestion
that may help to maintain
a strong relationship with your children is:
Do not expect
them to be adults.
Remember, the Bible says:
‘Through use
‘a person’s perceptive powers
are trained
to distinguish
between right and wrong.’
Well, that’s going to take time.
The Bible also speaks
of the “traits of a babe,”
the “foolishness” of boyhood,
and the “vanity” of adolescence.
So as your children
are going through these various stages,
recognize their limitations
and don’t expect them
to be little adults.
Now, the fifth suggestion:
When disciplining your children,
always show love
and discernment.
Now, this is supported
by Ephesians 6:4
because there it tells parents
‘not to be irritating your children,
‘but to bring them up
in the discipline
and admonition of Jehovah.’
So there’s no secret formula
on how to accomplish this,
especially
since every child is different.
So parents,
we encourage you, give thought
to the manner of your discipline,
always showing love
and discernment.
So there are five suggestion
that will help you to build
a strong relationship with your children
that will help them to respond
to your good training.
Now, what effect
will that have upon you parents?
Well, please read with me
Proverbs chapter 23,
verses 24 and 25
—Proverbs 23:24, 25.
It says: “The father of a righteous one
will surely be joyful;
“whoever fathers a wise son
will rejoice in him.
“Your father
and your mother will rejoice,
and she who gave birth
to you will be joyful.”
So the greatest joy
that a parent can have
is to see their children
turn out to be righteous
and wise servants
of Jehovah God.
It’s going to take time and effort
on your part to accomplish that.
But we encourage you,
don’t give up
on these precious gifts
that you have received from Jehovah.
As you watch
the following dramatization,
notice how the parents
rejoice in their children.
Thank you. I love you.
I love you too.
Showtime!
So the fire drill went off right
when we were having our math test.
Hey, Mom, Dad!
I’ve got to shower before our study.
Girls.
Oh, hey.
You need to finish the kitchen now.
No, we don’t have any time;
we just got home.
Yeah, we have to leave in 15 minutes.
No discussion, no excuses.
Now!
OK.
Thanks.
I did tell them to leave
the kitchen spotless, didn’t I?
Yeah.
They needed to hear that.
True.
It’s just overall they are . . .
I know. I know.
They were auxiliary pioneering
during the circuit overseer’s visit.
They really
put themselves out for others
including you—I mean, us.
I don’t ever want
to take them for granted.
Um, girls,
about the big mess earlier,
thanks for cleaning that up.
Your mom and I, we were upset.
But we really want you to know that, um . . .
. . . you are gifts from Jehovah
precious gifts we both cherish.
We love you very much.
What your Mom said.
Did you notice how the parents
rejoiced in their children?
Even though the daughters needed
some counsel and some discipline,
it didn’t overshadow
all their good qualities.
No, but these parents
made comments
like they never wanted
to take the girls for granted
and they cherished
these girls.
In fact, they openly expressed
that they loved them.
Now, it was apparent
this family had cultivated joy.
And we’re confident
that you as parents also are working hard
at cultivating joy
in your family.
Some things that will help you
are to be sure to tell
your children you love them,
give them your time,
listen to them,
acknowledge their feelings,
don’t expect them
to be adults,
and train them
with love and discernment.
These suggestions
are going to help you
to aim your children
to an everlasting future
of serving Jehovah God.
And as you put forth
all of this effort to assist your children,
you will be able
to rejoice in them
—these precious gifts
that you
have inherited from Jehovah.
Brother Ronald Curzan,
a helper to the Teaching Committee,
will now present
the final talk of this symposium,
“Cultivate Joy in Your Family
—Young Ones,
Rejoice in Your Parents.”